CSC/MA/OR 565 Graph Theory
Exam 1 - Tuesday, February 16

Closed book, closed notes, no computers, calculators, cell phones,
cameras, etc.  Space for scratch work will be included with the exam.

Covers Chapters 1-4.2, with a focus on the material covered in the
lectures, as detailed in the syllabus.

Be familiar with all definitions theorems, lemmas, corollaries,
propositions that are included in the class notes.
(Look for their precise wording in the text.)
Be ready to apply these to solve (relatively easy) problems.
Be ready to correctly state all of the main results.

Study suggestions:

- Be familiar with all definitions theorems, lemmas, corollaries,
propositions that are included in the class notes.
(Look for their precise wording in the text.)
Be ready to apply these to solve problems.

- Study solutions to homework problems.  Make sure you understand the
questions they are asking and any subtleties involved in their solution.
Think about how you could improve your own solutions
now that you know more graph theory or now that you have more
expertise in formulating proofs.  Think about how you might have
said things better or with fewer words or more precisely by using
the terminology and tools (results) we have been developing.

- Review the results, proofs, proof techniques, and examples discussed
in class and make sure you understand every step.

- Practice working problems from the text (You can use the "Exam 1"
message board to share questions & check answers).
If you understand what is going on, you are likely to find all the problems marked "(-)" easy.

Review questions:

1. Outline the main definitions and results about:
        paths, cycles  (what are the main tools?)

2. Outline the main definitions and results about:
        matchings and covers (what are the main tools?)

3. Outline the main definitions and results about:
        trees (what are the main tools?)

4. State 3 "characterization" theorems that we have studied.

5. Describe 4 different proof techniques and, for each one, give
        a complete graph theory proof that uses the technique.

6. Which of the problems we have studied are known to be solvable
        in polynomial time?

7. What is the graph isomorphism problem?

8.  Prove by contradiction:  A connected 4-regular graph cannot have a cut edge.

9. Can two nonisomorphic connected, simple, regular graphs have the same degree sequence?
Give some examples where n(g)=10.

10. Prove that Q_k is bipartite.

11.  Let n >= 2 and let  A_n be the adjacency matrix of K_n.
Show how to use graph theory to find
A_n^4[1,1] without multiplying matrices.

12.  State two facts about tournaments that were discussed in class notes or
proved in the homework.  (Double-check your statements for correctness.)

13.  Give a beautiful proof that every tournament has a directed path that includes every vertex.

14. Prove that Q_k has a perfect matching.

15. Prove that a tree has at most one perfect matching.

16.  Show how to solve this with graph theory: If T is a tree with k leaves and if every non-leaf vertex of T
has degree 5, find the number of vertices of T, as a function of k.

17. Let M be a maximal (not necessarily maximum) matching in G.
Prove the minimum vertex cover in G has size less than or equal to 2|M|.

18.  If M and M' are both matchings in G, what can you say about the
spanning subgraph of G induced by the symmetric difference of M and M'?

19.  Use a counting argument like the one used to prove the Marriage Theorem
to show that if G is a regular bipartite graph with bipartition (X,Y),
then |X|=|Y|.

20. Show how to use graph theory to show:  In a simple, connected, weighted, undirected graph, G,
any edge of minimum weight is in some minimum spanning tree.

21.  For positive integer, k, let G_k be the subgraph of Q_{2k+1}
induced by the vertices in which the number of ones and zeros differs by 1.
Show how to use graph theory to find alpha'(G_k), the size of the
maximum matching in G_k.

22. Give a precise statement of Hall's theorem.

23. Let G be a graph with no isolated vertices.
Show how, given a maximum matching M in G, to construct an edge cover of
G of size n(G)-|M|.  Give an example to show that the edge cover might not
be minimum.

24. Let G be a graph with no isolated vertices.  If C is a minimum edge
cover in G, what can the subgraph of G induced by C look like?
Show how, to construct from C a matching of size n(G)-|C|.
Give an example to show that the matching might not maximum.

25. Use graph theory to prove that if G is a simple graph,
with no isolated vertices, then beta'(G) >=  alpha(G).
(Reminder:  beta'(G) is the size of the minumum edge cover in G and
alpha(G) is the size of the maximum independent set.)

26. Prove by induction that A^k[u,v] is the number of (u,v) walks of length
        k in G, if A is the adjacency matrix of G.

27.  Use the recursive method for counting spanning trees to find the number of spanning trees of K_4.

28. Show how to use one or more of our theorems to find the number of spanning trees of:  K_5 with one edge removed;  K_4 with one edge duplicated.

29.  Find a formula for the number of spanning trees in the fan graph discussed in class in Lecture 6.

30.  Apply a theorem from class to  derive a recurrence for the number of spanning trees in the wheel graph and/or the ladder graph (search the web for a definition).

31.  Try to apply the determinant method to verify the number of spanning trees of K_4.

32.  Can you tell from the Prufer code of a tree whether or not the tree is a path?

33.  Give some examples of this:  A simple graph G can be isomorphic to its complement.

34.   Let O_k be the odd graph whose vertices are the k-element
subsets of {1, ..., 2k+1};
two vertices are adjacent if and only if they are disjoint.
Use graph theory to find the number of edges in O_k.

35. True or false?
Justify with a theorem/lemma/etc. or give a counterexample.

        A 3-regular, 2-connected simple graph cannot have a cut edge.
        A 3-regular, 2-edge-connected simple graph cannot have a cut vertex.
        If G is 2-connected and p is a u,v path, then G contains a u,v path
               that is internally disjoint from p.

36. (Save for next exam.)   What is the difference between k-chromatic and k-colorable?
What is the difference between  k-chromatic and k-critical?
Give example to highlight the differences.

37. What is the difference between k-connected and connectivity k?
Give example to highlight the differences.  Similarly for edge connectivity

38. For which values of k,l,m can you find a graph with minimum degree k,
connectivity l and edge connectivity m?

39.  Prove or disprove all four variations of this:  If G is 2-edge (vertex)
connected then any two edges (vertices) are contained in a common cycle.

40.  Prove or disprove all four variations of this:  If G is 2-edge (vertex)
connected then any two vertices are joined by at least 3 edge (vertex)
disjoint paths.

41. Prove or disprove all four variations of this: A 3-regular,
2-vertex (edge)-connected graph cannot have a cut vertex (edge)?